38284 add grouping function docs (#38308)
ClickHouse/ClickHouse: docs/en/sql-reference/aggregate-functions/grouping_function.md

---
---

# GROUPING

## GROUPING

[ROLLUP](../statements/select/group-by.md/#rollup-modifier) and [CUBE](../statements/select/group-by.md/#cube-modifier) are modifiers to GROUP BY. Both of these calculate subtotals. ROLLUP takes an ordered list of columns, for example `(day, month, year)`, and calculates subtotals at each level of the aggregation and then a grand total. CUBE calculates subtotals across all possible combinations of the columns specified. GROUPING identifies which rows returned by ROLLUP or CUBE are superaggregates, and which are rows that would be returned by an unmodified GROUP BY.

> The GROUPING function takes a column as an argument, and returns a 1 or a 0. 

Reviewer: It can take multiple columns and return a bit mask.

> The GROUPING function takes a column as an argument, and returns a 1 or a 0. 

Author: ```suggestion
The GROUPING function takes multiple columns as an argument, and returns a bitmask. 
```

    grouping(number, number % 2) AS gr
FROM numbers(10)
GROUP BY
    GROUPING SETS (
        (number),
        (number, number % 2),
        ()
    )
ORDER BY (gr, number);
```

Response
```response
┌─number─┬─count()─┬─gr─┐
│      0 │      10 │  0 │
└────────┴─────────┴────┘
┌─number─┬─count()─┬─gr─┐
│      0 │       1 │  2 │
│      1 │       1 │  2 │
│      2 │       1 │  2 │
│      3 │       1 │  2 │
│      4 │       1 │  2 │
│      5 │       1 │  2 │
│      6 │       1 │  2 │
│      7 │       1 │  2 │
│      8 │       1 │  2 │
│      9 │       1 │  2 │
└────────┴─────────┴────┘
┌─number─┬─count()─┬─gr─┐
│      0 │       1 │  3 │
│      1 │       1 │  3 │
│      2 │       1 │  3 │
│      3 │       1 │  3 │
│      4 │       1 │  3 │
│      5 │       1 │  3 │
│      6 │       1 │  3 │
│      7 │       1 │  3 │
│      8 │       1 │  3 │
│      9 │       1 │  3 │
└────────┴─────────┴────┘

21 rows in set. Elapsed: 0.015 sec.
```

```sql
SELECT
    number
FROM numbers(10)
GROUP BY
    GROUPING SETS (
        (number),
        (number % 2)
    )
HAVING grouping(number, number % 2) = 2
ORDER BY number
```

Response
```response
Received exception from server (version 22.7.1):

> Code: 47. DB::Exception: Received from localhost:9000. DB::Exception: Unknown identifier: __grouping_set: While processing grouping(number, number % 2) = 2. (UNKNOWN_IDENTIFIER)

Reviewer: I did not get this example.

Author: @novikd can you go through the examples I added and let me know what should be in and what they are highlighting?

@alexey-milovidov I believe that this test is meant to fail, maybe it highlights a common mistake and I should say something about it.  I have not had time to learn enough about this.

Reviewer: @DanRoscigno No, this is the test to cover corner cases in the code, it is not meant to be informative for a user.

```

```sql
SELECT
    number
FROM numbers(10)
GROUP BY
    GROUPING SETS (
        (number),
        (number % 2)
    )
HAVING grouping(number, number % 2) = 1
ORDER BY number
```

Response
```response
Received exception from server (version 22.7.1):
Code: 47. DB::Exception: Received from localhost:9000. DB::Exception: Unknown identifier: __grouping_set: While processing grouping(number, number % 2) = 1. (UNKNOWN_IDENTIFIER)
```

```sql
SELECT
    number,
    GROUPING(number, number % 2) = 1 as gr

> FROM remote('172.21.0.{2,4}', numbers(10))

Reviewer: I'd like to see real-world examples instead of equilibristics with system.numbers.
